---
title: "EU's Charades Cost Time, Money"
description: "Opinion piece criticizing EU's data protection laws and double-standards in picking battles with foreign governments, companies"
category: Opinion
author: "Peter Aleksander Bizjak"
date: "2023-07-12 06:41"
---

As someone who has been intricately involved in the sphere of technology, particularly in the capacity of a software engineer, I have observed with growing concern how the landscape of digital and data governance has been unfolding within the European Union. The [latest development of the EU-US Data Privacy Framework](https://www.politico.eu/article/eu-signs-off-on-data-transfers-deal-with-us/) is a testament to a pattern that, in my opinion, requires greater scrutiny.

Reflecting on the make-up of the EU, I find it rather disconcerting that there is a palpable lack of representation that mirrors my viewpoint - a sentiment shared by a considerable portion of tech enthusiasts and professionals alike. The EU asserts that it is committed to preserving the interest of all its citizens. However, the evidence suggests a diverging narrative; one of political bodies that seem more aligned with the agenda set by organizations such as the World Economic Forum. It's important to remember that governments are meant to be our representatives, not masters, and the battles they pick should resonate with the priorities of the people they represent. The drawn-out legal skirmish with US tech companies, for instance, feels more like a spectacle than a necessity.

The global stage today has been redefined by the technological prowess of nations and corporations. Amid this reshuffling, one entity that has shown remarkable influence is China. Here, we have a state that has repeatedly been called out for its questionable practices regarding human rights and governance. The incongruity between Western values and those upheld by the Chinese administration is glaring. Hence, it feels perplexing why the EU would not dedicate more focus towards formulating policies to address the challenges posed by Chinese companies, which could arguably be considered as the most significant adversary since the Axis forces of the Second World War.

The EU's recent recognition of the US as a "country with sufficient protection for Europeans' personal data" under its new framework is another decision that raises eyebrows. It's not about whether the US is capable of safeguarding our data; it's about the misplaced priorities of the EU's legal framework. Our continent, which has been a cradle of great thinkers and innovators throughout history, now lacks a strong "Big Tech" sector of its own. Instead, we have a burgeoning "Big Bureaucracy" whose rigorous legislation seems to stifle rather than stimulate innovation.

This expansion of bureaucracy is not without consequences. Engineers and entrepreneurs, who are the backbone of our society's technological advancements, are left to bear the brunt. The escalating legal costs, coupled with the rising tax burden, severely hamper the growth of small to medium-sized companies. Despite these efforts to supposedly protect our data, we still find ourselves dependent on American products.

In essence, what we need from the EU is not a game of diplomatic checkers with the US, but a clear, pragmatic approach that focuses on nurturing home-grown technological innovation, protecting our values, and addressing the more imminent challenges posed by adversaries like China. By doing so, the EU can ensure it is truly working in the interest of all its people and not just an influential few.

## Ursula Strikes Again

Reflecting on the comments made by Commission President Ursula von der Leyen regarding the EU-US Data Privacy Framework, one cannot help but critically examine her statements. Her remarks about providing trust to citizens regarding their data safety, deepening economic ties between the EU and the US, and reaffirming shared values are seemingly in touch with the current reality. However, a closer look might suggest otherwise.

The purported "shared values" between the EU and the US as mentioned by von der Leyen, appear less oriented toward the welfare of their respective citizens and more toward a trend of anti-humanism. The rising cost of living, uncontrolled inflation, and policies that seemingly put native population at a disadvantage, do little to bolster faith in these shared values. The policies of both the EU and US (in the US I'm specifically talking about Democrats) raise questions about the extent to which they truly represent their constituents. If indeed their collaborative efforts are to bear any fruit, they might benefit from re-evaluating their positions and acknowledging the ever-growing discontent among the populace. The decision-making over the past few years has left many questioning the moral and ethical standing of these institutions, and rightfully so.

On the issue of the National Security Agency (NSA) spying on US and European citizens, the recent executive order by President Joe Biden restricting US intelligence agencies from accessing Europeans' data is a commendable step. However, it barely scratches the surface of the problem. It doesn't fundamentally alter the course of the increasingly centralized governance model in the US, which has been gradually eroding the principle of self-governance.

This shift toward centralization, a value seemingly shared between the EU and the US, has profound implications. It not only undermines the freedoms traditionally associated with the Western way of life but also creates a harmful economic landscape. This setup paves the way for a permanent class of renters, where individuals are stripped of their financial independence and the aspiration to own property. Moreover, it stifles innovation by erecting barriers for new entrants, effectively allowing only a few selected giants to turn profits via public-private partnerships.

If the EU and the US truly wish to affirm shared values that serve the interests of their people, it might be time to redefine these values. They must seek to champion decentralization, facilitate innovation, and, most importantly, promote policies that place their citizens first. Such a refocus would not only enhance public trust but also ensure sustainable and equitable growth.

## Oh, You Privacy Watchdogs...

In 2021, the European Data Protection Board (EDPB) [published a legal study](https://www.dataguidance.com/news/eu-edpb-publishes-legal-study-government-access-data) that exposed the troubling deficiencies in data protection regimes across countries like China, India, and Russia. The study was comprehensive and thorough, revealing the stark difference between these countries' practices and the EU's stringent privacy laws. Yet, it's 2023, and the action from our leaders does not seem to align with the findings of this study.

Instead, we see a political theater of engaging in a proxy war with Russia in Ukraine, while maintaining cordial relations with China despite its well-documented lack of respect for personal data protection. The praise some leaders, even beyond EU borders, have for China's authoritarian model of governance stands in stark contrast to the recommendations of the EDPB. This disconnect between the stated goals of data protection and the real-world actions of our politicians is unsettling.

Such discrepancies raise questions about the efficacy of these watchdog organizations. They appear to bark without biting (pun intended), identifying problems but not enforcing solutions. If the representatives of the people are going to ignore their findings and recommendations, what purpose do they serve? It's about time we redirected our focus to the glaring issues in countries like China, India, and Russia, and reassessed our relationship with the US. Stretching ourselves too thin over multiple fronts only results in a bloated bureaucracy that siphons resources from hardworking people while producing no tangible benefits.

## What now?

The EU must re-evaluate its approach to foster a culture that truly promotes innovation and progress. As an admirer of the American ethos of 'work first, regulate later' or better yet, 'not regulate at all', I believe the EU has much to learn from this mentality. If the EU can't be streamlined or restructured to genuinely represent its people, its existence comes into question. The EU must consider placing professionals in the helm of power, rather than career politicians whose attentiveness seldom exceeds the span of a news cycle. A good start would be rethinking the appointment of figures like Ursula von der Leyen, whose reputation seems more aligned with political maneuvering than real expertise.

If the EU is serious about data protection, it should understand that the private sector is often better equipped to create secure systems. Companies are driven by survival to adapt, innovate, and improve far quicker than the public sector. It's innovators, entrepreneurs, and industry professionals who truly drive progress. The role of the government should be to facilitate, not hinder, these efforts.

Lastly, if the EU continues down this path, it runs the risk of driving away its talent pool. The rapidly declining living standard, combined with the stifling bureaucratic environment, makes relocation a plausible consideration for many, including myself. Given the circumstances, moving to a country that truly embraces innovation and entrepreneurial spirit, like the US, becomes an increasingly attractive prospect. After all, the world is big, and the opportunities are endless.
